Solving/understanding Dynamic Programming Problems Strategy

Recognizing a Dynamic Programming problem is often the most difficult step in solving it.
Can the problem solution be expressed as a function of solutions to similar smaller problems?

DP is essentially just an optimization technique.
DP is a method for solving problems by breaking them down into a collection of simpler subproblems,
   solving each of those subproblems just once, and storing their solutions.
The next time the same subproblem occurs, instead of recomputing its solution,
   you simply look up the previously computed solution.
   This saves computation time at the expense of a (hopefully) modest expenditure in storage space.

There is no one fool-proof plan that we can use to solve
all DP questions because not every problem is the same,
but one should be able to solve most DP problems following below steps:

1. See if DP is applicable. if problem can be defined in terms of
   smaller subproblems and the subproblems overlap then chances are
   that DP can be used.
2. Define recursion.
    Having subproblems of similar kind means there is recursion.
    a) Define problem in terms of subproblems, define it in a
       top-down manner, do not worry about time complexity at this point.
    b) Solve base case (leave rest to recursion). The subproblems are
       solved by recursion, what is left in the base case.
    c) Add a terminating condition. This step is relatively trivial.
       We need to stop somewhere, That will be the terminating conditions.

    After this step we have a working solution using recursion.
3. Try memoization (optional). If a subproblem is solved multiple
    times, then try to cache its solution and use the cached value when
    smme subproblem is encountered again.
4. Try solving Bottom-up. This is the step where we try to eleiminate
    recursion and redefine our solution in forward direction starting from
    the most basic case. In the process we store only those results that
    will be required later.

p.s Step-3 is usally for beginners, who are just starting with the concept.
    It is an improvement over Step-2 without getting into the complexity of DP.
    In Interviews, usually the recursive solution is acceptable, but the answer is DP.
    In the coding cometitions, usually DO is the only accepted solution. With
    experience we start skipping step-3 and jump to step-4 directly.

7 Steps to solve a Dynamic Programming problem
   1. How to recognize a DP problem
      Recognizing that a problem can be solved using DP is the first and often the most difficult step in solving it.
      What you want to ask yourself is whether your problem solution can be expressed
      as a function of solutions to similar smaller problems.

   2. Identify problem variables
      Now we have established that there is some recursive structure between our subproblems.
      Next, we need to express the problem in terms of the function parameters and see which
      of those parameters are changing.

      A way to determine the number of changing parameters is to list examples of several subproblems
      and compare the parameters. Counting the number of changing parameters is valuable to determine
      the number of subproblems we have to solve. It’s also important in its own right in helping us
      strengthen the understanding of the recurrence relation from step 1.

   3. Clearly express the recurrence relation
      Recurrence relation: Assuming you have computed the subproblems, how would you compute the main problem?

      This is an important step that many rush through in order to get into coding.
      Expressing the recurrence relation as clearly as possible will strengthen your problem
      understanding and make everything else significantly easier.

      Once you figure out that the recurrence relation exists and you specify the problems in
      terms of parameters, this should come as a natural step. How do problems relate to each other?
      In other words, let’s assume that you have computed the subproblems. How would you compute the
      main problem?

   4. Identify the base cases
      A base case is a subproblem that doesn’t depend on any other subproblem.
      In order to find such subproblems, you typically want to try a few examples,
      see how your problem simplifies into smaller subproblems, and identify at what point it
      cannot be simplified further.

      The reason a problem cannot be simplified further is that one of the parameters would become
      a value that is not possible given the constraints of the problem.

   5. Decide if you want to implement it iteratively or recursively
      The way we talked about the steps so far might lead you to think that we should implement
      the problem recursively. However, everything that we’ve talked about so far is completely
      agnostic to whether you decide to implement the problem recursively or iteratively.
      In both approaches, you would have to determine the recurrence relation and the base cases.

┌─────────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────┐
│                                     │           Recursive                  │            Iterative               │
├─────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Asymptotic time complexity         │ Same assuming memoization            │  Same                              │
├─────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Memory usage                       │ Recursive stack, sparse memoization  │ Full memoization                   │
├─────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Execution Speed                    │ Often faster depending on the input  │ Slower needs to do same work       │
│                                     │                                      │ regradless of the input            │
├─────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Stack Overflow                     │  Problem                             │ No issues as long as enough memeory│
│                                     │                                      │ full memoization                   │
├─────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
│  More intutive /easier to impliment │  Often easier to reason about        │ most perople find it harder to     │
│                                     │                                      │ reason through                     │
└─────────────────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────────────┴────────────────────────────────────┘
   6. Add memoization
   Memoization is a technique that is closely associated with DP.
   It is used for storing the results of expensive function calls and returning the cached result
   when the same inputs occur again.

   In recursive solutions, adding memoization should feel straightforward.
   Let’s see why. Remember that memoization is just a cache of the function results.
   There are times when you want to deviate from this definition in order to squeeze out some minor
   optimizations, but treating memoization as a function result cache is the most intuitive way to implement it.

   This means that you should:
      1. Store your function result into your memory before every return statement
      2. Look up the memory for the function result before you start doing any other computation

   7. Determine time complexity

   There are some simple rules that can make computing time complexity of a dynamic programming problem much easier. Here are two steps that you need to do:

   1. Count the number of states — this will depend on the number of changing parameters in your problem
   2. Think about the work done per each state. In other words, if everything else but one state has been computed, how much work do you have to do to compute that last state?

   The work done per each state is O(1) in this problem because, given all other states,
   we simply have to look at 3 subproblems to determine the resulting state.

Cheet Sheet:
   Step 1 : DP Identify
      1) Choice (Include and Exclude of every elemet)
      2) Optimal (maximum, minimum, largest, smallest, greatest etc...)

   Step 2: Solve by recursion
      ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
      │               Recursive Solution                      │
      │┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐│
      ││              Base Condition - Block                 ││
      ││                                                     ││
      ││ return value for minimum viable/possible valid input││
      ││                                                     ││
      │└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘│
      │ ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐│
      │ │ Choice Diagram:       Item                         ││
      │ │                        │                           ││
      │ │                        ▼                           ││
      │ │                   Can be Included                  ││
      │ │                    /              \                ││
      │ │        Is Item Best or Worst       Discard         ││
      │ │               /         \                          ││
      │ │          Consider       Discard                    ││
      │ └────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘│
      └───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

   Step 3: memoization
      1. In recursion function what values are changing ? consider them to remember
         create a matrix of changing values against desired value

         Init value is return value of base condition
            0      1      2    ....    n
         ┌──────┬──────┬──────┬──────┬──────┐
      0  │ Init │ Init │ Init │ Init │ Init │
         ├──────┼──────┼──────┼──────┼──────┤
      1  │ Init │      │      │      │      │
         ├──────┼──────┼──────┼──────┼──────┤
      2  │ Init │      │   ───┼──────┼──────┼──► Store output
         ├──────┼──────┼──────┼──────┼──────┤    recursion
      .  │ Init │      │      │      │      │
         ├──────┼──────┼──────┼──────┼──────┤
      m  │ Init │      │      │      │      │
         └──────┴──────┴──────┴──────┴──────┘
                  Matrix [M+1][N+1]

         If recursion to be called first check if its
         called/solved and return value is stored in
         the matrix , if yes use it from the cell
         else call recursion and store it in its corresponding cell

   Step 4: Optimize it through bottom up (iterative solution)
      Recap:
         Step 1: Recursive Solution
         Step 2: Recursive Solution + Memoization [Partial Dynamic Programming]
         Step 3: Iterative Solution + Memoization [Full Dynamic Programming]
         Step 4: Iterative Solution + Optimized Memoization [Optimized Dynamic Programming]

      Idea is to replace Recursive solution with iterative solution.
         1. Base Block will be used to Initilize Matrix
         2. Consider a cell and assume cell above and before are already solved
            and has best solution and derive best value from it and calcualte
            value for current cell
         3. return desired cell value.

Kanpsack is categorized into three types:
   fractional Kanpsack - Greedy approach
   0-1 Kanpsack - Dynamic Programming approach
   unbounded Kanpsack - Dynamic Programming approach
Broad categories of DP parent questions:
    1. 0-1 Kanpsack [6 variations]
      1.1 subset sum
      1.2 equal sum partition
      1.3 count of subset sum
      1.4 minimum subset sum difference
      1.5 target sum
      1.6 number of subset with given difference
    2. unbounded Kanpsack [5 variations]
        difference b/w 0-1 Kanpsack & unbounded Kanpsack
        rod cutting
        coin change - I, maximum number of ways
        coin change - II, minimum number of ways
        maximum ribbon/product cutting
    3. Fibonacci [7 variations]
    4. Longest common subsequence [15 variations]
      Longest Common Substring
      Shortest Common Supersequence
      Longest Palindromic Subsequence
      Longest Repeating Subsequence
    5. Longest increasing subsequence
        10 variations
    6. Kadane's Algorithms
        6 variations
    7. Matrix chain multiplication
        Egg Dropping Problem
        7 variations
        Word Break
        Palindromic Partitioning
    8. Dynamic Programming on Trees [4 variations]
    9. Dynamic Programming on grid [14 variations]
         Rat in a Maze Problem
         Minimum Cost to Cover the given positions in a grid
         Maximum size square sub-matrix with all 1s
    10. Others
        5 variations


apendix:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nqowUJzG-iM&list=PL_z_8CaSLPWekqhdCPmFohncHwz8TY2Go&index=2&ab_channel=AdityaVerma
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CiIa0Wut6dc&list=PLEJXowNB4kPxBwaXtRO1qFLpCzF75DYrS&index=2
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OQ5jsbhAv_M&list=PLZES21J5RvsHOeSW9Vrvo0EEc2juNe3tX

patterns:
https://leetcode.com/discuss/general-discussion/458695/dynamic-programming-patterns
https://patterns.eecs.berkeley.edu/?page_id=416
https://ashutosh-kumar.medium.com/dynamic-programming-types-and-patterns-7b1406c46a6b
https://algo.monster/problems/dynamic_programming_intro
https://hackernoon.com/all-you-need-to-know-about-dynamic-programming-0tj3e5l
https://www.yourdevopsguy.com/all-you-need-to-know-about-dynamic-programming/?ref=hackernoon.com
https://github.com/asutosh97/educative-io-contents/blob/master/Grokking%20Dynamic%20Programming%20Patterns%20for%20Coding%20Interviews.md
https://gist.github.com/tykurtz/3548a31f673588c05c89f9ca42067bc4

Learning:
https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/follow-these-steps-to-solve-any-dynamic-programming-interview-problem-cc98e508cd0e/
https://towardsdatascience.com/understanding-dynamic-programming-75238de0db0d
https://levelup.gitconnected.com/understanding-dynamic-programming-in-theory-and-practice-7835610ca485
https://www.codechef.com/wiki/tutorial-dynamic-programming
https://community.topcoder.com/tc?module=ProblemArchive&sr=1&er=50&sc=&sd=&class=&cat=Dynamic+Programming&div1l=&div2l=&mind1s=&mind2s=&maxd1s=&maxd2s=&wr=
https://people.cs.clemson.edu/~bcdean/dp_practice/